[music]
>> Pushkin
Many years ago, I was on the board of a
think tank called the RAND Corporation
out in Los Angeles.
It was one of the coolest things I've
ever done.
RAND does all kinds of work on health
care and energy in the environment. And
most of all, they consult with the Air
Force. Which meant from time [music] to
time various Air Force dignitaries would
come and brief us.
And there were two I've never forgotten.
The first was a four-star general named
David Goldfein.
From 2016 to 2020, he was chief of
staff, the highest military post in the
Air [music] Force.
Here's a Dave Goldfein story that sums
him up.
I was once in [music] an elevator with
him at some conference, and we were all
locked in conversation with the
conference host. And there was a man in
the corner of the elevator who clearly
worked for the hotel, older guy in a
maintenance uniform, who I'm ashamed to
say we all treated like he was
invisible.
Except for General Goldfein, who stopped
the conversation, reached over,
shook the man's hand. "Hi, I'm Dave
Goldfein. [music] How was your day?"
In my experience, most powerful people
do not notice the anonymous maintenance
guy [music] in the corner.
Second memorable person who came to RAND
when I was there,
the Secretary of the Air Force, Heather
Wilson. The political appointee who runs
the service along with the chief of
staff.
I met Heather Wilson almost 10 years ago
now, and my friends will back me up on
this. I have not stopped talking about
her.
In my perfect universe, Heather Wilson
would run for president. I don't care
which party. It [music] doesn't matter.
And if she did, not only would she win
easily, but she would restore everything
about that office that has been damaged
[music] over the past generation.
When we decided to look at some
consequential mistakes people have made
for this mini-series,
I remembered something that happened
back when Wilson and Goldfein were
running the Air Force.
A tragedy that unfolded in Texas.
And a story about the mistake at the
center of it. Or, more accurately, a
story about how to respond [music] to a
mistake.
And I wanted to share it with you.
>> [music]
>> My name is Malcolm Gladwell. You're
listening to Revisionist History, my
podcast about things overlooked and
misunderstood.
This is my conversation
>> [music]
>> with Dr. Heather Wilson
and General Dave Goldfein.
Before we go on,
am I remembering correctly, you were in
the you were in the same Air Force
Academy class.
Yeah, we started at the Air Force
Academy in the in on the same day. I'm
in the class of 1982.
And we didn't know each other really
well as cadets, and our careers crossed
paths several times after graduating
from the Academy, but we came back
together at the end of our our
our federal careers as service secretary
and chief. So, in some ways, our values
were formed at the same institution at
the same time. Yeah. Yeah, I will I will
add that we one of us graduated in four
years, became a Rhodes Scholar,
congresswoman, started her own company,
became university president and
secretary, and one of us didn't.
>> [laughter]
>> You were
How deep
>> One of us did something useful, Dave.
>> [laughter]
>> How far down in the graduating class
were you, Dave? I've forgotten. Well, I
will tell you that I was part of the
group that made the top half possible.
>> [laughter]
>> But you said something just then.
I keep calling you Dave. I should call
you General Goldfein. No, please call me
Dave. Okay.
Um So, I just want to Why don't you guys
just I don't know which one of you wants
to start.
Tell me how this all when this when this
began, how it began, how you found out
about it. Go from there. It was one of
the worst days. It's still probably the
worst day in my professional life.
So, it was a Sunday in November 2017. I
was in the upstairs of my my
row house in Virginia. I got a call from
the
the Inspector General. And um
he said, "I don't know if you're
watching TV, but there's been something
terrible that's happened in Sutherland
Springs, Texas." Overnight, the quiet
town of Sutherland Springs, Texas,
trying to come to grips with the
nation's latest horrific mass shooting.
More than two dozen people were killed
during Sunday services at the small
Baptist church. The victims ranging in
age from 5 to 72 years old. We also
learned a short time ago that between 12
and 14 of the dead are children.
And I of course immediately went on and
found out what was going on.
Um I uh Someone walked into a church in
Sutherland Springs, Texas,
and opened fire,
and killed I think it was 26 people in
the end. It was just awful.
We are told now that the parents of the
shooter's ex-wife worshipped here. They
were not at church yesterday.
Uh Inspector General, General Sam Saeed,
said, "We're not sure,
but we think he was an airman."
And even more than that, um
he may have been dishonorably discharged
for a violent offense while on active
duty.
And we might have failed to inform the
FBI. Which would have if it there was a
way to put somebody on a list so they
can't buy a weapon.
And so, Dave and I talked that Sunday
afternoon. We agreed we would meet at
9:00 in the morning in our conference
room
and find out the facts. And then and
take it from there.
But it was awful. It was just awful.
Yeah, so, you know,
as the as it all came together,
most important thing for us was to
before we get as many facts as we could
that we when we gathered them
people on Monday to get everybody
together.
And it was So, when when we got together
at 9:00 in the morning, the
the Inspector General, General Saeed,
confirmed that yes, he was an airman.
Yes, he had been convicted of a violent
offense while on active duty.
And that the service had failed to
inform the FBI and put him on the list
so he couldn't buy a weapon.
And then you think it, you know, you
think at that point it can't get worse,
but it did. Yeah. Um
because the next thing we found out in
that meeting
was that the Defense Department
Inspector General had done a review
three years earlier
of whether all of the services were
appropriately notifying
the FBI and putting people on the, you
know, can't buy a weapon list.
And
and said there were problems. So, so we
had been told that the system didn't
work. There was an audit finding, and we
didn't fix it. Mhm. So, it was it was
not a good day.
So, you have
we have a case of somebody who is
dishonorably discharged for a violent
offense.
And what's the internal mechanism in
which the way that case is dealt with
within the Air Force?
>> When when when systems screw up, when
um
when things fail, it's usually not
because of somebody intended to make a
mistake. It's because, you know, the
person who did that job moved on, or
nobody wrote down the procedures, or
people weren't adequately trained. And
the way it was supposed to work in the
service is that a felony offenses,
unlike minor offenses, felony offenses
are handled by the Office of Special
Investigations and a military
prosecutor.
Once there is a conviction, it should
have been reported on a system by that
Office of Special Investigations to the
FBI, and then it is closed out and, you
know, put on file.
That didn't happen.
And so, it was a combination of systems
and processes and training and um
and it it wasn't done right. And and we
were told that in in advance when the
DOD Inspector General did an audit of
all of the all of the services. And in
fact, the Air Force had been doing it
doing better on it than the other
services, but that didn't matter. We
still knew we had a problem, and we'd
failed to fix it.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back with more of my
conversation with General Goldfein
>> [music]
>> and Dr. Wilson.
After you get that call,
Dr. Wilson,
who do you call? Who's your first call?
Is it Dave?
My first call usually was to Dave. Now,
we also talked to the General Counsel
and so forth. He was actually out of
town, as I remember, on that day. But
one of the things, and this is one of
the things about our relationship as
service secretary and chief, the chief
has an obligation to give his best
military advice to the civilians
appointed um to run the department. I as
a secretary, there's nothing that says
that you have an obligation to ask for
it. But I generally did a much better
job when I asked for it, because Dave
Goldfein made me a much better
secretary. Mhm. You said you were you
guys were shaped by the same values. And
I This is a really important part, and I
want you to talk a little Before we go
on, I want you to talk about it. What do
you mean by that? So, each service has a
set of core values
that are infused into every member of
the institution, normally during basic
training, and then uh reinforced
throughout their time in service.
And so, you could go to each service and
find those core values. For us, it's
integrity, service, and excellence.
And so, you know, integrity first is how
we're taught to approach all things.
So, you know, in terms of how we
approach this, it started off with
ownership because we needed to ensure
that we were true to the values of the
institution, and that we were
representing the institution correctly
as its leaders.
And so, integrity first, service before
self, meaning that we, you know, we look
at
uh this opportunity to lead as a gift
that's offered by those we're privileged
to serve. And each day we ask the
question, are we worthy of that trust
and confidence? Not only of the airmen
that we were privileged to lead, but
also the American people that entrusted
us with their sons and daughters.
And so,
those core values drive, you know, how
we choose to handle things throughout
our careers. Mhm. I would say on the
integrity first part, um
once on that Monday morning, we knew the
truth. We knew
that he had been an airman.
We knew that he had been convicted of a
violent crime.
And we knew that we should have reported
that to the FBI, and we didn't. Those
were facts we knew by Monday morning.
And our as I said, our general counsel
was out of town, but there was a more
junior lawyer around the table there,
and everybody was just Man, it was just
a somber meeting.
But the lawyer when we kind of went
around the table and said, all right,
what do you think we should do next?
On this one, it was very often that Dave
and I came from things with a slightly
different perspectives. You know, we we
had seen different things, and we I
think we made better decisions because
steel sharpens steel. We'd engage a lot
with each other. But on this one, there
was no daylight between us from the very
beginning. We knew the truth, and we
thought we needed to just say it.
And so, we made a decision at that
meeting that we would release a
statement by by late that morning. Um we
gave them a deadline of 11. I think it
took us till 1:00. It always takes a
little longer, but
but uh to say to say what we knew. And
we also thought that that would allow
our institution
to focus on fixing the problem rather
than
denying it, or delaying things, or
trying to duck accountability.
And And Dave and I also did a press
conference or press availability with
the Pentagon media the following
morning.
Which wasn't You know, that wasn't fun.
Um but some ways when we just said,
these are the facts as we know them, and
this is what we're doing to fix the
problem, what could they ask? You know,
we weren't going to deny things. It was
really unpleasant.
But it was the truth, and I [music]
think
Dave and I were both committed to just
telling the truth.
Well, good afternoon. Um
Perhaps I'll open up with a couple of
uh remarks. Um the offenses for which
the shooter in Texas was court-martialed
should have been reported.
And that's why we launched a full-scale
review of this case and all others like
it.
Uh since Sunday night, the Air Force
Inspector General has talked to about
100 people involved in this case.
Um we are looking at all of our
databases.
And if we have problems that we find,
we'll fix them.
Dave, do you Can you Can you give us
your memory of that press conference?
Yeah, so, you know, it's uh
I I think we both expected to get, you
know, really tough questions, and
we were prepared, you know, to own up,
and to
But it was like Heather said, right? It
It once we, you know, opened up with,
hey, we own this,
you know, we we, the United States Air
Force,
uh goofed us up. And we as the leaders
represent the institution that goofed us
up.
And so, we take ownership, and our focus
is now on ensuring that we understand
all the facts,
and we're going to fix this to ensure
that it can never happen again.
Once we started off with that statement,
you really could have sort of felt the
air go out of the room, and uh and then
the questions at that point were just
more about detail,
and I don't remember getting any really
pointed, you know,
uh attacks or questions. It was more,
okay, well, tell us what you know about
this, and how are you going to handle
that? And so, I think that
uh you know, my recollection of it was
it accomplished what we were hoping it
would accomplish, which was taking
ownership. Mhm. One of the things that
somebody around that table on Monday
morning said was, well, you know, you
and the chief weren't the leaders of the
Air Force at the time this prostitution
happened, and they failed to to report.
And both Dave and I had the same
reaction was, that doesn't matter.
We represent the institution, and Dave
couldn't take the four stars off of his
shoulders any more than I could take the
airman symbol off of my lapel. When you
are the leader, you own the institution,
and you represent the institution, and
you have to take ownership for the
institution, and lead it forward. And
so, so, the fact that it didn't happen
on our watch, that's no excuse. Mhm.
Mhm. Um we're not going to make an
excuse.
We're not going to say it was somebody
else's problem.
We'll be right back.
What happens next? You have this press
conference. You've You've You've You've
told the world, we're looking into this,
we're going to go over every single
case, make sure we've done the right
thing, but we still have
the aftermath in Texas.
This was a This was a bedroom community
for Randolph Air Force Base, and then
some of the victims were the family of
an airman who was deployed overseas, and
Dave took the lead on that part. And
I'll I'll let him tell that part.
We reached out to the community, and
cuz there was a series of funerals they
were holding,
and reached out to the mayor of San
Antonio, Ron Nirenberg at the time,
and uh asked if it would be appropriate
and it would be acceptable for me to
travel to the San Antonio and attend the
funeral in uniform, representing the
service, knowing that we were
I know we we were
uh
responsible for everything we've been
talking about.
Cuz I wanted to make sure that we
weren't contributing to any increased
pain by me being there.
And I offered to also come in civilian
attire if that's what they preferred,
and they said, no, we we appreciate if
you would be here
in uniform.
So, I met with the mayor first, and we
talked about, all right, how do we
ensure that this is not just a, you
know, once and done, that we have a
long-term commitment to this community
as the community works to recover from
this tragedy.
Uh how do we ensure that the Air Force
is continually plugged in for the long
term? So, that was what the agenda
working out with the mayor.
Mhm.
Tell me more about
going to that funeral.
You're How did you feel on the flight
down?
Well, it was uh I knew that we had an
airman that was deployed,
and and several members of his family.
This is a young airman.
Um several members of his families were
killed.
And we were going to be several. Yes,
members of his extended family. Cuz I
remember again, Sutherland Springs is a
bedroom community for Randolph Air Force
Base, which is one of our largest
Air Force training bases.
So, the number of people that come
through Randolph, that's probably one of
the most traveled bases.
So, when you talk to airmen, right, and
ask them of their, you know, common
experiences, many of them will share a
period of time when they went through
Randolph Air Force Base, or Lackland Air
Force Base in San Antonio.
So, San Antonio is known as Military
City USA uh is one of the, you know, the
the monikers that that is used because
there's so much military. You can't go
to the airport in San Antonio without
seeing a large number of young airmen
who are who are arriving for basic
training, or leaving. And so, you know,
on the way down, I'm traveling in
uniform to Military City USA.
And I'm going to meet with this airman.
And having had uh
the unfortunate opportunity to meet with
a lot of uh airmen and families over the
course of my career, especially in the
two years I was the air component
commander for Central Command,
where we lost a number of soldiers,
sailors, airmen, Marines while I was
there.
>> [music]
>> Um I'd had experience with handling
uh the tragedy of death,
and
talking with the families.
>> [music]
>> And so, I I had a good sense of what I
was stepping into.
I'll never forget, you know, going to
the funeral.
And I'm And I met with the pastor of the
church, Frank Pomeroy,
and it [music] continually remains
perhaps one of the most profound
spiritual moments
>> [music]
>> that I that I had as chief when
you know
Pastor Pomeroy stood up and
started off by asking us if we would
pray for the shooter and his family.
And he did so while his 14-year-old
daughter was in a casket
because she they had lost her in the
shooting.
I don't know if there's
better example of spiritual courage.
Right? We forgive those who trespass
against us. Yeah, I don't know that
we're going to find a better example of
that.
And and so being there for that airman,
being there for those families
was uh you know both
um profound and also I I think I think
every time there's a setback or a
failure in an institution
it's an opportunity for the leaders to
teach the next generation how to handle
failure.
Because we all get knocked down.
All institutions have failures.
Um the question is not whether you're
going to fail, the question is how do
you handle it when you do fail?
Do you take ownership? Do you step up?
Do you get back up? And do you teach the
next generation of leaders how to handle
failure so that they can be more
uh prepared when it comes to them
because it's going to come to them.
My concern on this particular one was
would there be a hostile reaction
by the community
to uh my being there because and it's a
hostile reaction not to me but a hostile
reaction to my state air force.
And there was none of that.
It was a welcoming opening. Sutherland
Springs is an incredible community and
again I go back to you know Pastor Frank
Pomeroy who is just an incredible an
incredible spiritual leader.
Uh I think he set the tone
for all of us when he asked us to pray
for the shooter. Mhm.
And there was
there wasn't a hostile reaction because
you showed up.
Um I don't know uh how much of it was
because I think it was more we were all
there for the same purpose. Yeah.
Right? I was I was not there to uh do
anything other than to I mean I didn't
sit in I didn't sit in the front row.
They
they tried to you know move me up the
front row and I said no, I'm part I'm
part of this community today and so I
want to sit with the community and I'd
like to sit in an area that is you know
with the families
that are represented here and and
and so this was not a uh
you know we made a point I made a point
of my team. I said uh do not please make
this a big protocol event for the chief
of staff of the air force.
This is
uh Dave Goldfein coming here to show my
respect
my love for these families and to
represent the institution that let them
down.
Mhm. Mhm.
So I don't think I could have done it.
First of all, I think Dave was you know
there's a when people think about the
American air force they don't think
about somebody in civilian clothes, the
secretary. They think about
our uniformed military and so I think
Dave was the right one to represent us
there and he and I talked about this.
I I also think I'm not sure I could have
done what he did.
I mean it was it was just
um
pretty amazing. As a leader
to do that but I don't mean with the
humility that he did it because he's
that way
but just the whole thing is just so
incredibly heartbreaking.
Mhm.
One last question.
Tom, it's such an extraordinary story.
Um can you
reflect on what this ought to teach us
what this taught you and what this ought
to teach us about what a leader is?
Yeah, um
there's a variety of lessons I think
woven into this. I actually had to go up
to Capitol Hill and testify
uh in front of the Senate several months
after this this happened.
And uh
anybody who testifies in front of the
the Senate needs to be prepared to be
grilled to get really hard questions.
Um and I've had harder questions on more
benign topics
than I did on that day.
And
uh
I think part of it was because I did in
my opening statement pretty much what
Dave and I had done the day after it
happened
which was to own it and to tell
the Senate what we were doing to fix it
and I of course had met individually
with the senators mostly the senators
and and house members most directly
affected.
I remember we had a had a wonderful
director of legislative affairs uh
um General Steve Basham. We called him
Bash. He was a B-2 pilot, very
experienced in legislative affairs and
and aviation and he was sitting behind
me in his very stoic ways as he did as a
two-star.
Um and helped prepare me. He had been
there Monday morning sitting through
the meetings. He had gone with me to the
hill for all of the one-on-ones. He had
been involved in all of this.
And he was he was he was a very straight
guy, very professional guy and when we
walked out of that hearing
he said, you know, "Madam Secretary, I
learned something today."
That's a that's pretty strong statement
coming from a two-star with all of his
experience. And I said, "Well, what's
that, Bash?"
He said uh
"The result of today's hearing wasn't
decided today.
It happened in the 24 hours after the
incident
when when you and the chief took
ownership."
Mhm.
And
um by taking ownership
by owning failure
we not only allowed the institution to
focus on fixing the problem
and focusing on the future rather than
on kind of trying to mess around and
deny the past but it also
you know, sometimes when institutions
screw up they get sued or there's claims
or whatever and yes, the the the
government did get sued, the air force
got sued by the the families of the
victims.
Um
but for as the institution
the families also
were if we had denied responsibility
the relationship between the communities
and the service would have been
completely different.
And because it would have been you know
arms length difference with lawyers
talking to lawyers and
um it it would not have allowed them to
heal either.
And so I think it mattered
to the institution to be able to say,
"Okay, when things get screwed up the
best thing to do is to own it and fix it
even when it really hurts."
And it's also the best for the people
who have been impacted by the failure.
I'll share with you that I you know I've
I've come to believe over the years that
the the journey to becoming an
inspirational servant leader
is a journey that actually never ends.
I'm still not the
servant leader I want to be but I'm
working on it.
And I think if we ever get to a point
where we plant the flag as leaders and
believe we figured it all out and got it
all, maybe that's a pretty good
indication of it's time to retire.
Because we stopped learning, we stopped
listening, we stopped growing as
leaders.
And so
you know, leadership as a servant leader
is a gift
and it's a gift that's offered by those
you're privileged to lead and you've got
to earn and re-earn that gift every
single day.
And you and you earn trust and
confidence as a leader over weeks,
months and years
but it can be lost in a single moment of
indiscretion or bad decision-making or
bad behavior.
And so for us
there was an opportunity that was
presented
for us to teach that next generation of
leaders what servant leadership looks
like.
And so perhaps part of the you know the
the positive outcome of this incredibly
terrible tragedy for these families in
this community
is there's a there's a story here that
can help the next generation
when they face something similar.
And how to step up as leaders and take
ownership.
I'm going to change what I said at the
beginning.
I don't just want Heather Wilson to run
for president. [music]
I want the two of them on the ticket.
Doesn't matter which party, doesn't
matter which order. [music] Wilson and
Goldfein or Goldfein and Wilson. Wilson
and Goldfein in 2028 to remind us what
real leadership looks like.
If you want to know more about the two
of [music] them, they wrote a wonderful
book together, Get Back Up, Lessons in
Servant Leadership. Links to the book
are in our show notes.
Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Naddaff Hafrick.
>> [music]
>> Our editor is Karen Shakhurji,
fact-checking by Angely Mercado. Our
executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence, Owen
Miller, and Sarah Bourguignon. Original
music [music]
by Luis Guerra. Sound design and
mastering by Jake Gorsky.
I'm Malcolm Gladwell.
Coming next week on our mistakes series
He's like, "Yo, I need you to make a
record."
And I said, "What?" He said, "Make a
record with J. Lo and put Ja on it and
make it a duet."